Hey welcome back, so in this video we're going
to be talking about setting up game object
communication a little more. We're going to
set up a simple UI text display for pin count,
we will then set up a pin setter box and a
PinSetter.cs script, I'll explain that in
a minute, we'll continuously count the standing
pins and then we'll make a modification that
means that we'll only start counting the pins
after the ball enters some virtual box towards
the end of the play space. So just to talk
you through that more visually, what I want
to do under this overhead camera view here
using the new free Unity 5 render texture
feature is I want to add in a simple piece
of UI text in fact I'm going to go ahead and
do that now but before I do let's just look
at the overall layout that we have at the
moment.
We have a top camera, main camera and directional
light, we have a lane and we have pins etc.
I'm going to start playing with this hierarchy
for example I think that the directional light
could be argued it's part of the lane so I'm
going to pop that into the lane because it's
part of the lane itself; the pins are fine,
the ball is fine, and it's the UI canvas that
I'm going to be adding to. So let's add ourselves
a UI text element like that to our UI canvas.
In fact you want to make sure that it's inside
the left panel.
So if you want to do that directly then you
click left over here and then go ahead and
add a UI text element. Perfect. So there it
is, it actually hasn't childed itself quite
properly to the left panel so go ahead and
do that now, and then make sure that you have
a text element inside the left panel. There
it is. Now using the 't' key or the UI box,
the UI element modifier, you can make this
a reasonably sized text box, line it up in
the middle, centralise your text and give
it a number. I'm going to put 10 because we
intend to have ten standing pins
Now remember, always make your font plenty
big enough so that it renders with good resolution,
yeah you don't want to be scaling these fonts
up, now you'll want plenty of font size so
that they'll render nicely. There you go,
so to preview what's going to be happening
we're going to have a display under here that's
the number of pins, and we want that to update
continuously and then eventually it's going
to update only when the ball is at the end
of the play space and it will also change
colour from green to red for example in order
to show when the pins have settled;
but for now we just want to get it to update.
So, looking at the objectives for the lesson,
we are going to have to have some way of this
piece of text communicating with everything
else, so we need to think about what is going
to talk to the text and where the script is
going to be. We have already set up our UI
text display and we need to create a Pin Setter.
So let's talk about the pin setter arrangement
first. So I'm going to double click on the
pins arrangement and it takes me down to the
end of the play space. Now there are a few
things together here, there's a pin arrangement,
there will be a collider at the back later
on to detect the presence of the ball, we
already have this guy that's animated nicely.
We can hopefully see that in the scene view
- where is it? I would need to trigger the
animation - you remember this animation? We
don't have a trigger for it available right
now, but this guy comes down, animates and
swipes the pins out of the way. If you remember
we got stuck because we wouldn't remember
to set the pins properly without knowing which
ones had fallen over and which ones hadn't
so that's why we're writing code to be dealing
with that. So that's the point that we're
at.
What I want to do at the end here is make
a play box. This play box is going to serve
a few functions, but let me make it first
to help you visualise it. So inside the lane
create yourself a 3D cube so select the lane
in the hierarchy and then a 3D cube. Now it
probably won't listen to the fact that you've
selected the lane so you'll need to drag it
in. Play box or pin setter? Let's settle on
the word Pin Setter, so it's a pin setter
arrangement. Now where is it? Well it's here,
it's absolutely tiny. So we need to be scaling
this thing up, how large? Well the play space
is 105 cm wide, so how about we make it 120cm
wide for now, centred at 0 in the x.
It may not look like it from here but it is
centred over the middle of the play space.
Then how tall? I don't know, let's just try
a hundred and twenty as well; hmm kind of
looks reasonable to me; and then why not make
it a cube? Make a cube a cube right? Here
we go, now we have a box but it's not big
enough so let's try a 2m long box OK, now
remember you can use your translate tool to
just put this box down towards the end of
the play space, I want it to fully encompass
the pins, the swiper bar and well that's it
really.
So let's move it across using the blue arrow,
it's still not big enough so let's make it
2.5m or 2.4 so it's something like that, and
the other thing that I want to do with it
is turn - actually I want to completely remove
its renderer. There you go, so we have a virtual
box now, which just about encompasses the
pinsetter, sorry the swiper here, the pin
array, and goes pretty much to the back of
the play space. We can make fine adjustments
to the size of this later. Now this is going
to do a few things, it's going to detect the
presence of the ball when it comes in but
it's also going to hold the script that, as
if there was a camera in top of it - in fact
there is a camera in the top of it, it's called
top camera.
You see the camera there? Why not put the
top camera inside the pin setter? Just for
arrangement purposes. So the pin setter is
this box and it has now a camera associated
with it. OK, kind of makes sense, it'd be
the pin setter that has the camera in it.
So the other thing that the pin setter does
is that it gives the ability to put some behaviour
on it, so let's make a new script called pin
setter. New c# script, there it goes, OK now
being tidy I want to put that in my assets
folder. There you go, perfect, now we have
this pin setter to do.
Now let's go back to the objectives for this
lesson. There it is, so the first objective
is to continually count the standing pins
alright? So that is what I'm going to want
you to be doing here. We have a pinsetter
script that can do it, we have pins that are
already aware of whether they are upright
or not so let's sort out this unreachable
code error and then I'm going to put you into
a challenge. So let's look at line 30, it's
saying that we have unreachable code return
true. Let's just remove it, that's legacy
code. So remove your bottom return true from
your Pin.cs IsStanding method, we don't need
that any more.
Perfect, so back in Unity, what I want you
to do now is write a method on PinSetter.cs
called int CountStanding() so write int CountStanding()
method. I want that to loop through all of
the pins in the scene, I want it to keep track
of the number of standing pins and then just
return the current number of standing pins;
just that. OK so that's it; and if you really
want bonus points then make it update that
text box but for now I just need it to do
those things. So go ahead, pause the video,
and go and do that challenge now please.
You are pausing the video right? You are doing
the challenges? All of the learning comes
from the challenges. So enough nagging, welcome
back, let's get this challenge done. So let's
firstly go to this PinSetter script and think
about what properties this pin setter thing
is going to have. Well it's going to need
some way, some public or private way of keeping
track of the number of standing pins but it
doesn't necessarily have to do that at the
class level, we could just start writing our
CountStanding method first, so let's do that.
int, because this is a method that returns
an int, CountStanding so remember always put
your variables at the finest level of scope
that you can, if they don't need to be at
the class level don't put them there, put
them inside the method. If you need to move
them out later fine. So here's your int standing
and initialise it to zero, it's good practice.
It doesn't need to be at the top, don't put
it at wider scope than you need it. So how
are we going to do this?
Well, good question. We're going to need some
idea of what the pins in the game space are.
So how do we find the pins? We're going to
say something like this - for each and then
I like to do my brackets first including my
curly brackets OK, so it's going to be a foreach
loop. What is it going to do? Well it's going
to be foreach thing of type pin, let's call
the variable pin, in now what, GameObject.FindObjectsOfType
use the generic format pin and then it’s
a method so you need some squigglies right?
Fantastic.
So for each pin, in the result of this method
which is an array of pins, so for each pin
in the scene, if - now this is where our method
that we wrote before comes in handy - pin.IsStanding
if pin is standing, you see that reads like
English - a good sign that the code's reasonably
good - then what do we do with standing? Well,
we could just go += 1 or we could just say
++. Just a short cut, let's do that. Fantastic.
OK, what would happen at the end of this method?
You would just return - we must return something
remember because the method signature says
that we return an integer - return standing;
and we've kept it all local to the actual
method, which is absolutely fantastic.
So what we could do to test this is we could
just print, or Debug.Log CountStanding every
single frame. OK, and I'm going to Pin and
make sure that my other print statement is
taken out of my Pin.cs that's the pinsetter
script that I'm ending up with, simply that,
let's see if it works. Let's bowl the ball.
Oh, what happened there? Let's have another
look. Now the pins have all gone squiffy!
So what has happened? Why are they squiffy?
Why have they all gone flying? Have I got
two pin arrays or something?
Something's gone horribly wrong here, I have
a pin array on here, and I click - OK, we
know what's happening. What's happened is
that pinsetter has a collider on it but we
have not yet ticked is trigger, so we're having
collisions happening between the pins and
the collider. Set is trigger on your pin setter's
collider. It's only an informational collider,
we're not actually using it for physics, that'll
remove any physics from the pinsetter collider;
and now your pins are stable, perfect. So
let's bowl the ball, and see if I've passed
my own challenge. No, I may have missed! I
didn't miss, but it's not updating - but it
won't be updating because we never talk to
the UI text yet but look, if we look over
at the console, in fact if I just clear the
console you see it's logging 9,9,9,9,9 which
is the number of standing pins.
We knocked one down. Perfect, so the final
thing that we need to do here of course is
to somehow tie this to that UI element; you
know, the UI element that we created at the
beginning? Well, lots of ways of doing that,
how are we going to do it? Well the way that
I'm going to do it is I’m going to expose
myself; I mean not expose myself but I'm going
to expose a standing display. It's a public
piece of text; but you'll notice when you
type text as before that nothing comes up
in the autocomplete. Why? We don't have the
name space.
We need the UnityEngine.UI name space in order
to use the text keyword, fantastic. Now text
will be recognised as a valid type. It is
that textbox and I'm going to give it a descriptive
name. OK, public text standingDisplay. Fantastic,
right, now what are we going to do on every
update? Rather than just logging that to the
console I'm going to say standingDisplay.text
equals countStanding, which is fine but it
returns an integer and this text box is bound
to want a string so we'll use the handy ToString
method. You see how that works?
We take the result of the CountStanding method
and run the ToString method on it. Let's see
if it works. It's all very well talking about
it, actually let me make sure that all my
log entries are out of the other scripts,
I think that they are, OK cool; let's run,
check my console null reference exception
now - that's because when I put a public text
standing display in I didn't follow my own
suggested reflex which is to immediately go
and find it in the scene, which is the pin
setter here, find where it's looking for the
standing text and drag it in.
It's in the left panel, text, fantastic OK,
let's try this. Good, we have ten showing
there, let's bowl the ball, boom look at that,
four pins remaining updating all the time.
It may glitch, but that's because some of
these pins that are flying through space are
passing through vertical and when they do
pass within three degrees of vertical you
are being reported - you see they are out
here in outer space - they are being reported
as upright but that's something that we can
sort out later.
So actually that's all that we can be doing
now in this video because the issue of working
out where the pins have settled and of detecting
whether the ball has entered this pinsetter
box can be left to the next video which will
fit nicely. So thank you for watching this
video, I hope that you've got as far as I
have, and that you have a pin count here which
is updating itself continuously, at all times,
including when the pins have gone flying off
into outer space and if you've got that far,
congratulations, we will refine this and improve
on it soon.